Welcome to JW Broadcasting®
for June 2023!
Over the past few years,
because of the COVID-19 pandemic,
the Gilead classes were limited
to 24 students.
Now on the 80th anniversary of the school,
48 special full-time servants
from around the world
were once again together in one class!
On March 11, a program
of specifically crafted talks
was presented
as a parting gift to the graduates.
It’s our pleasure
to share these talks with you.
Here is Part 1
of the 153rd Gilead graduation program.
“Oh, would some power the gift give us
“to see ourselves as others see us!
It would from many a blunder free us.”
Well, that famous quote
from the Scottish poet Robert Burns
acknowledges that it is impossible
to always see ourselves as others do.
Well, that’s why we need training.
That’s why we need advice.
That’s why we need counsel
to help us to improve
and to work on certain flaws
that perhaps we just can’t see in ourselves.
Well, what a wonderful opportunity
you students at Gilead have had
to receive focused spiritual training
from brothers who truly love you!
And now, no doubt you’ve come
to see yourself more clearly
than you have ever seen yourself before.
But, you know, that quote from Robert Burns
can be understood in a different way too.
See, maybe what we
cannot see clearly in ourselves
are all of the good qualities that we possess
or the potential that we have
to be used by Jehovah in his service.
First Samuel 16:7 says:
“Man sees what appears to the eyes,
but Jehovah sees into the heart.”
Well, in seeing into your heart,
Jehovah saw fit to draw you
into a dedicated relationship with him.
And since then, he’s entrusted you
with various assignments in his service.
Now, why?
Why did Jehovah do that?
What does he see in you?
What qualities
and what spiritual qualifications
does he observe?
Well, we can’t know
all that Jehovah sees in you
because we cannot see ourselves
as Jehovah sees us.
That’s probably why
so many of God’s servants in Bible times
were reluctant
to accept challenging assignments.
Now, just think of some examples of this
—people who did not see
the fine qualities in themselves
that Jehovah could see.
For example, take Gideon.
Now, in Judges chapter 6, let’s look at this.
At Judges 6:14,
notice what Jehovah said to Gideon.
He said: “Go with the strength you have,
“and you will save Israel
out of Midian’s hand.
Is it not I who send you?”
But now, how did Gideon react?
In verse 15, Gideon said:
“Pardon me, Jehovah.
How can I save Israel?
“Look!
My clan is the least in Manasseh,
and I am the most insignificant
in my father’s house.”
Well, obviously, Gideon
could not see himself as Jehovah saw him.
What about Moses?
In Exodus chapter 4,
when Jehovah assigned him
to lead Israel out of Egypt,
Moses was keenly aware
of all of his inadequacies.
In fact, when talking with Jehovah,
he raised one objection after another.
Well, was Jehovah aware
of the inadequacies that Moses had?
Of course!
Of course he was!
He also knew
that Moses’ brother, Aaron, was older
and that he was a better speaker.
But Jehovah saw in Moses qualities of faith,
unselfishness, and meekness
—qualities that made Moses
the right choice for the job.
What about Jeremiah?
When Jehovah commissioned him to serve
as a prophet, do you remember what he said?
Let’s look at it.
Jeremiah chapter 1
—Jeremiah chapter 1—
and look at verse 6.
Jeremiah says:
“Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah!
I do not know how to speak,
for I am just a boy.”
Well, what did Jehovah say?
‘Oh. OK. OK, Jeremiah,
I’ll see if I can find someone else.’
No.
Look in verse 7:
“Jehovah then said to me:
‘Do not say, “I am just a boy.”
“‘For you must go to all those
to whom I send you,
and you should say everything
that I command you.’”
Why was Jehovah so confident
that Jeremiah was the right choice
for this special assignment?
Well, of course, if you look in verse 8,
Jehovah said: “I am with you.”
Now, of course, that’s the same thing
that Jehovah said to Gideon;
it’s the same thing he said to Moses.
In other words,
because Jehovah was with them,
they would be successful.
But there’s another reason too.
Do you see what it says in verse 5?
Jehovah said to Jeremiah:
“Before I formed you in the womb
“I knew [isn’t that interesting? I knew] you,
“and before you were born I sanctified you.
I made you a prophet to the nations.”
Jehovah knew Jeremiah.
He saw in Jeremiah certain qualities
that would make him an effective prophet
with Jehovah’s help.
Well, could Jeremiah see that in himself?
No.
He just had to trust in Jehovah’s assessment,
move forward,
and do what Jehovah asked him to do.
Well, we have wonderful examples of this
in our modern day too.
Brother John Booth
was a faithful, humble brother.
He started in full-time service in 1928.
Now, in 1935,
he was called to work
at the factory at Bethel.
But now, just after working for a few days,
he was very surprised
when Brother Knorr invited him
to go on the road
as a regional service director,
what we would perhaps call
a circuit overseer today.
Brother Knorr explained
there was a great need
and that Brother Booth could be a big help
because of his experience as a pioneer.
But Brother Booth replied
that he had never had
a position in the congregation.
He had never given a talk.
Can you imagine?
And he had no training to do so.
But here’s what Brother Knorr said:
“Eloquent speakers are not what is needed,
“just someone who loves the service
and will take the lead in it
and will talk about service at the meetings.”
Brother Booth said:
“With misgivings, doubts, and fears,
but wanting to do Jehovah’s will,
I agreed to try it.”
Well, how did it turn out?
Brother Booth moved forward.
He spent his whole life in full-time service,
later serving for more than 20 years
as a member of the Governing Body.
When he finished his earthly course,
The Watchtower  stated:
“[He] was beloved
for his profoundly humble
and kind Christian personality.”
Obviously, Jehovah saw something good
in Brother John Booth.
Well, what do we learn from these examples?
Like Gideon and Moses
and Jeremiah and Brother Booth,
we might feel inadequate
for certain assignments.
And it’s good that we’re not overconfident
or too self-reliant.
Yet, we don’t want to go
to the other extreme either.
If so, you see, we could begin to think:
‘I could never be a pioneer.
I could never be a ministerial servant.
‘I could never be an elder.
I could never be a Bethelite.
I could never be a construction servant,’
and on and on and on.
If we’re given one of those assignments
or some other one,
we could even hesitate to accept
—give in to fear.
But the fact is that we
cannot fully see ourselves
as Jehovah does.
How much better to make ourselves available
and then move forward with the work
that we’re given to do,
looking to Jehovah to make up
for whatever we may lack!
Well, now, you students,
who are soon-to-be graduates,
will no doubt have a variety of assignments
in the coming years.
Whatever those assignments are,
move forward with full confidence in Jehovah.
Jehovah will be with you.
He’ll give you everything that you need
to be successful
in accomplishing the work.
So here’s the question:
Can you see yourself as Jehovah sees you?
Well, perhaps to some extent, yes,
but not completely.
So be ready to listen to counsel
and to make adjustments.
But also, when your good qualities
and your good potential are noticed
and you receive new assignments,
grab hold and move forward.
And may our wonderful God, Jehovah,
always be with you
and bless you as you do so.
Well, now we’re looking forward
to the first talk
of our Gilead graduation program.
It’s going to be from a member
of the United States Branch Committee,
Brother Jesse Morris, and his theme is
“What Will You Be Called?”
The greatest honor anyone can have
is to be called a servant
of the Most High God, Jehovah.
And as you’ve seen
from your deep study of God’s Word,
servants of Jehovah also have
distinct personality traits, or qualities,
that are called to mind
when their names are mentioned.
For example, what qualities, or traits,
do you think of
when we mention the following names?
Ruth, Gideon,
David, Martha
—yes, the name of a servant of Jehovah
can call to mind
certain qualities, certain traits,
that are worthy of imitation.
So, what will you be called?
As you begin your new assignment,
what quality, or trait, would you like
your fellow workers to think about
when your name is mentioned?
The Bible book of Proverbs provides
a very reachable goal in this regard.
Please open to Proverbs chapter 16,
and we’ll read together verse 21.
That’s Proverbs 16:21:
“The wise in heart
will be called understanding.”
What a worthy goal that is
—to be called a person of understanding!
Now, from your studies,
you know understanding
is the ability to put the facts together
—to grasp the full,
complete picture of a matter.
So how is understanding demonstrated?
Is it revealed in a test score?
Or is it revealed
by being the first to provide a solution
in a group setting or perhaps at a meeting?
Well, let’s keep reading verse 21:
“And the one kind in speech
adds persuasiveness.”
There’s how understanding is demonstrated:
in kind speech or, as the footnote indicates,
“appealing speech,” “sweetness of lips.”
So a person who’s called understanding
puts the facts together,
grasps the full picture
in order to find good in a matter.
And that is reflected through kind,
positive, persuasive speech.
Now, this is more than just being optimistic
or the power of positive thinking.
Understanding has a source.
Please turn to Proverbs,
this time chapter 9,
and we’ll read verse 10.
That’s Proverbs 9:10:
“The fear of Jehovah
is the beginning of wisdom,
and knowledge of the Most Holy One
is understanding.”
There is the Source
—“the Most Holy One,” Jehovah God.
He’s both the Source of understanding,
and he’s the supreme example
in how to use it.
Just think for a moment
of what happened after the tragic,
painful rebellion in the garden of Eden.
What did Jehovah do?
Immediately, he put the facts together;
he saw the complete picture.
And then he uttered the Edenic promise
—a positive promise—
that gives us hope,
even right after that painful tragedy.
And hundreds of years later
with the nation of Israel,
they would repeatedly abandon Jehovah.
What would he do?
He would hear their groanings,
he would hear their cries,
he would see their changed attitude,
and he would raise up judges
to save them time after time.
Yes, Jehovah God shows us
what real understanding is.
And because we trust in him,
we too can find the good,
speak and act kindly and positively.
And how refreshing it is
to see this in your class!
Your kind, positive speech and actions
with one another
and with those that you come in contact with
have been very refreshing to see.
It’s a result
of your deep trust in God’s Word
and your deep trust in Jehovah himself.
And your studies
have just further enhanced that
over these past few months.
In contrast, much of the world’s education
fosters critical thinking.
Note what The Watchtower  says about this:
“Do not be fooled by the mistaken notion
“that a cynical, critical,
pessimistic attitude
“is the same as intelligence.
Actually, negative thinking
demands little of the intellect.”
So, what a privilege to know,
as you dear students do,
what real understanding is!
It’s not just the ability
to identify what’s wrong with a situation.
It’s the ability
to identify how good can address it.
And this will encourage
your brothers and sisters.
One Bethel family member
observed understanding
in the assistant overseer of a department.
On one occasion, the department overseer
scheduled a meeting with several brothers
from other departments,
but he forgot to inform his assistant.
Then on the day of the meeting,
the overseer was away.
So several brothers arrived for a meeting
that the assistant knew nothing about.
What would he do?
It was observed
that he said a brief, silent prayer;
came out;
welcomed the group;
addressed the points for discussion;
and at the end said:
“Thank you brothers
for coming to this meeting
“and allowing me to fill in for the overseer.
And I’ll update him when he returns.”
He just covered for him
—beautiful example.
He knew this man
had shouldered responsibility for decades.
This was not his pattern.
So he just applied the good.
He showed understanding.
Now, realistically,
there will be days when it will be hard
to be known as a person of understanding.
What if, though,
there’s a prolonged period of time
where we’re finding it
difficult to find the good,
to speak and act kindly and positively?
Maybe our mate or a trusted friend
even speaks with us and says,
“Your kind, positive speech
and actions are changing.”
What can we do?
Well, each person and their relationship
with Jehovah is unique.
But let’s consider the example
of the writer of Psalm 73
and learn a valuable principle.
The writer of this inspired psalm
was struggling
with even whether or not to serve Jehovah.
Note the turmoil he’s in
at Psalm 73:14:
“And I was troubled all day long;
every morning I was chastised.”
Now, it can be difficult
to be known as a person of understanding
when we’re in this frame of mind.
In fact, in verse 22,
the psalmist honestly admits:
“I was unreasoning and lacked understanding.”
So, what would he do?
Could he ever be called understanding again?
Notice verse 15:
“But if I had said these things,
I would have betrayed your people.”
So first, the psalmist held back
from making his perplexing thoughts public.
He knew that that kind of negative speech
would affect God’s people.
He likened it to a betrayal,
as if he were releasing the names
of his fellow worshippers to the enemy.
That’s what he likened negative speech to.
Instead, he kept
to his spiritual routine and waited.
And then a powerful moment
took place in verse 26:
“My body and my heart may fail,
“but God is the rock of my heart
and my portion forever.”
There it is—understanding.
The psalmist knew he was not alone.
Jehovah God, the immovable Rock,
was keeping him stable
in the midst of this violent windstorm
that he found himself in.
That powerful realization plugged him back
into the Source of understanding,
and he was once again able
to put the facts together,
find good in a matter,
and speak and act kindly and positively.
What’s the lesson?
When we are in turmoil
and feel lacking in understanding,
we are in good company.
Many faithful servants of Jehovah
have felt this way.
When we do like the psalmist,
we hold back from negative speech,
which can affect those around us.
Instead, we speak privately
with a trusted friend,
we keep to our spiritual routine,
and we wait.
We wait for our powerful moment
—the realization that Jehovah God
is the Rock of our heart.
And one final point:
Demonstrating understanding
includes demonstrating it with ourself.
You will make mistakes, and when you do,
your trust in Jehovah
will allow you to find the good in yourself,
as Brother Sanderson mentioned
in the opening comments.
And that will help you
to keep a positive frame of mind.
Well, we know Jehovah God
is going to be with you in your assignments.
May your trust in him
—the Source of understanding—
continue to deepen.
This will allow you to address situations
by putting the facts together,
finding good in a matter,
and speaking and acting kindly,
positively, persuasively.
When you do this,
you’ll be showing that you are wise in heart
and you will be called understanding.
We thank you so much, Brother Morris,
for that very, very encouraging talk.
Well, now we’re interested to hear
from a helper with the Writing Committee,
Brother Nicholas Ahladis.
His theme for us today is “There Is a River.”
Well, earthquakes
have been in the news quite a bit recently.
But we’re going to read
about an earthquake in Psalm 46,
which describes one
that has never happened in recorded history
—Psalm 46, starting with verse 1.
It says there:
“God is our refuge and strength,
“a help that is readily found
in times of distress.
“That is why we will not fear,
though the earth undergoes change
“[or, some translations say,
“though the earth quakes”],
“though the mountains topple
into the depths of the sea,
“though its waters roar and foam over,
though the mountains rock
on account of its turbulence.”
Now, there’s no evidence
that this poetic description
of mountains toppling into the sea
literally happened in ancient Israel.
But clearly the world around the psalmist
seemed to be collapsing somehow.
What catastrophic situation
is being referred to?
Well, The Watchtower
has explained that this psalm
seems to fit the time of King Hezekiah
when Jerusalem
was being threatened by Sennacherib,
the king of Assyria.
Now, we know those threats were not empty.
Sennacherib had conquered
surrounding nations.
He had also conquered
the fortified cities around Jerusalem
that were protecting the city.
He’d actually overrun the villages
right up to Nob,
and Nob was within sight of Jerusalem
—one mile (1.5 km) away.
And, as you know,
Assyria was famous for its cruelty.
They’ve found palace walls
from Sennacherib’s time
that show shocking scenes of brutality
toward conquered peoples.
So we can understand why
the psalmist felt the world was collapsing.
The description is so ominous and bleak.
But suddenly, in verse 4,
the tone of the psalm changes completely.
“There is a river the streams of which
“make the city of God rejoice,
“the holy grand tabernacle of the Most High.
“God is in the city; it cannot be overthrown.
God will come to its aid
at the break of dawn.”
So the psalmist’s thoughts
go from catastrophe and chaos
to peace and confidence.
And verse 4 speaks
about “a river” in “the city of God.”
There’s no river flowing in Jerusalem.
So, what is this referring to?
Well, some suggest that it refers
to Hezekiah’s Tunnel,
which was built
in order to bring water into the city.
But the poetic structure of the psalm
actually parallels the river
to the holy tabernacle of Jehovah
—the holy tabernacle of the Most High—
and the pure worship carried on there.
And it’s interesting that when Hezekiah
received the threats from Sennacherib,
the Scriptures say in 2 Kings 19
that Hezekiah
took the letters from the Assyrians,
he went into the temple,
he spread them out before Jehovah,
and he prayed fervently.
And then Jehovah
sent a reassuring message through Isaiah:
“I have heard your prayer to me
concerning King Sennacherib of Assyria. . . .
“He will not come into [the] city
“or shoot an arrow there or [bring] a shield
or . . . siege rampart against it.”
Now, the sons of Korah,
who recorded this psalm,
may have seen Hezekiah going into the temple
and then heard
Jehovah’s response through Isaiah.
And this would give them
complete confidence in the outcome.
And we all know what happened next.
The huge Assyrian army
was vanquished overnight by an angel.
And it could be that verse 5 alludes to this,
where it says: “God will come to its aid
at the break of dawn.”
But what does this psalm teach us?
Well, the psalmist’s example
of focusing on pure worship and His Word,
which is likened to a river in this psalm,
shows that we can experience peace
even when the world around us
seems to be collapsing.
The psalmist declared: “God is in the city.”
He was its Ruler—not Sennacherib!
For decades, Judah had been wayward
and God was not in Jerusalem.
But Hezekiah renovated the temple
and restored pure worship there.
That pure worship
was like a river of blessing
that connected the people to Jehovah
and gave powerful evidence
that God was in the city.
Our Pure Worship  book
associates the river of Psalm 46
with the river that flowed
from Jehovah’s sanctuary in Ezekiel’s vision.
And you might recall that that river
became wider and deeper
the further it flowed.
And the Pure Worship  book says about it:
“Like the visionary river that Ezekiel saw,
the flow of pure truths
has expanded rapidly.”
And today the flow of that river
includes Bibles,
Bible-based publications, and videos
in over a thousand languages.
Ezekiel said that the river got so deep
that a person had to swim.
And for the last five months,
you students have felt like Ezekiel.
Your course has immersed you
and sometimes taken you underwater.
And that was
from the flood of Bible knowledge
you received
through your study, your lectures,
and also the interaction
with the students and your instructors.
And you may have felt
like you were even drowning sometimes.
But like Hezekiah and those with him,
you’ve also been
in the confines of a secure city
where Jehovah’s worship prevails.
During these months,
the world has been dealing
with the aftermath of the pandemic
and wars and other disasters.
But you were like the psalmist:
The earth could quake,
the mountains could topple;
but you enjoyed a special period of peace
because you were focused on that river.
Now you’re going back out into the trenches
with the rest of us, so to speak.
Some of you will serve
where there’s economic turmoil
or violence or other disasters,
or you may personally face health trials,
even persecution.
But the lesson of Gilead
and the lesson of Psalm 46
can serve you well.
When you stay focused on “the river,”
Jehovah’s pure worship,
you can remain confident and joyful
regardless of what challenges life brings.
An ancient Greek writer said:
“No man ever steps in the same river twice.
For it’s not the same river,
and he’s not the same man.”
And isn’t it true that our lives
are constantly changing
and new challenges suddenly crop up?
But Jehovah’s river of blessings
just keeps flowing and is constantly renewed.
It supplies life-giving water
in all circumstances.
And this is so even when
the figurative mountains of this world
are toppling and the world is in chaos.
A sister in the war zone
in eastern Ukraine wrote:
“What we needed most was spiritual food.
“We were overwhelmed with joy
when we received the JW Boxes
“(after the Internet failed)
and spiritual food
“became available again.
“Despite many challenges and difficulties,
“when we meet with fellow believers,
“our problems
are not the main subject of discussion.
“More often, we share
how Jehovah supports us,
what has strengthened us,
and what we’re thankful for.”
We can sense her calmness.
These friends are living examples
of how focusing on “the river”
can preserve our peace
even in times of disaster.
Now, returning to Psalm 46,
we can paraphrase verses 8 and 9,
which may have occurred when the angel
destroyed the Assyrian army.
It says: ‘Jehovah has done
astonishing things on the earth
‘—bringing an end to wars,
breaking the bow and the spear,
and burning the military wagons.’
We can just imagine the astonishing scene:
going out into the Assyrian camp
and seeing the entire army devastated.
Now, what does that mean for us?
Well, we hate the war and violence
that plagues this world
and affects our dear brothers,
and we long for it to end.
But until then, understanding that Jehovah
is still in the city
—still in control of his people—
gives us complete confidence.
No humans, no attack
of an Assyrianlike government,
can stop the flow of that river
or shake the city.
And the psalmist concludes in verse 11
with the reassuring echo of verse 1:
“Jehovah of armies is with us;
the God of Jacob is a secure refuge for us.”
Well, we don’t know what
your individual future holds after Gilead
or what assignments you’ll receive,
but you can be confident
that Jehovah “is in the city.”
He’s in control.
And remember the lesson of Gilead:
Stay focused on “the river”
—the river
that “make[s] the city of God rejoice,”
the river that will flow throughout eternity.
Thank you so much, Brother Ahladis.
That is absolutely
one of my favorite scriptures
and so reassuring
during such challenging times.
Well, now we’re going to begin
a series of three talks
by instructors from the Gilead School.
So first of all, we’re going to start
with Brother Trent Lippold,
and his theme for us is “The Under-Rower.”
He is famously the object
and not the subject of a Bible account.
We easily sympathize with him
because we can understand
his emotions and feelings at the time.
Yet, his response
is that which provides a powerful life lesson
in our service to God.
We’re introduced to him
in the book of Mark chapter 14
—Mark chapter 14, beginning in verse 50.
Verse 50 picks up the account
of Jesus in the garden of Gethsemane.
And we read of the 11 faithful apostles:
“And they all abandoned him and fled.
“However, a certain young man
“wearing only a fine linen garment
over his naked body
“began to follow him nearby,
“and they tried to seize him,
but he left his linen garment behind
and got away naked.”
The young man in this verse
is understood to be John Mark,
and notice John Mark’s outstanding quality.
When the apostles all fled,
it says John Mark followed “nearby.”
What tremendous courage of this young man!
While the great men, the apostles, fled,
Mark stayed and he followed nearby.
Now, interestingly,
we know that Peter eventually also followed.
But notice this about Peter in verse 54:
“But Peter, from a good distance, followed.”
John Mark followed nearby.
In this we see
not only the courage of John Mark,
but we also see his devotion to Jesus.
To what extent he knew Jesus
or had interactions with Jesus,
we don’t know.
But he did have some.
And his devotion and courage for his Master
is unquestionable here.
The Scriptures also describe Mark, John Mark,
as “a strengthening aid”
and “a great comfort.”
Those were the observations of him
later in his life.
And we do know from the Scriptures
that John Mark
worked in the background
for some very big personalities
—the apostle Paul, the apostle Peter,
and Barnabas.
John Mark initially caught the attention
of the apostles
—of Paul and Barnabas—
when he was in Jerusalem.
Paul, or Saul at the time, and Barnabas
came there in 46 C.E.
And they took John Mark with them
to the exciting assignment of Antioch,
where Christianity was beginning to flourish,
and John Mark was brought along with them.
Later, in the year 47 C.E.,
John Mark was selected
to go with Barnabas and Saul
on the first missionary tour.
It’s described for us
in the book of Acts chapter 13.
At Acts 13:4, 5, it says:
“So these men [that is, Barnabas and Saul],
“sent out by the holy spirit,
went down to Seleucia,
“and from there they sailed away to Cyprus.
“When they arrived in Salamis,
they began proclaiming the word of God
“in the synagogues of the Jews.
They also had John as an attendant.”
John Mark
—he is described here as “an attendant.”
The footnote says “an assistant.”
The writer of Acts used
a very interesting word here for “attendant,”
and it’s a Greek word that literally means
“an under-rower.”
An under-rower was a man
who worked below the decks
on a large Roman naval vessel.
He would be below deck,
he would have to row in unison
(in cooperation) with his fellow rowers,
and he would have to follow the pace
set by the captain.
Why would this term be used
for John Mark in this instance?
Well, a clue comes from verse 4,
where it says:
“They sailed away to Cyprus.”
So the metaphor of an under-rower
now takes on greater meaning.
Incidentally, the same term
is used by the apostle Paul
when he refers to himself
as a servant of God,
or an attendant, in 1 Corinthians chapter 4.
Why would that be significant?
Why use it in 1 Corinthians?
Because in one of the bays next to Corinth,
the large ships of the Roman navy
took port there.
And so, again, the metaphor
of the under-rower
would take on great meaning.
Well, the infamous event
occurred in Acts chapter 15
—the event John Mark was an object of.
Notice in Acts chapter 15,
beginning in verse 37, it says:
“Barnabas was determined
to take along John, who was called Mark.
“Paul, however, was not in favor
of taking him along with them,
“seeing that he had departed
from them in Pamphylia
“and had not gone with them to the work.
“At this there was a sharp burst of anger,
“so that they separated from each other;
and Barnabas took Mark along
and sailed away to Cyprus.”
Denied an opportunity, denied a privilege,
what does Mark do?
It says he “sailed away
[with Barnabas] to Cyprus.”
Mark kept active in Jehovah’s service.
How does he do that?
John Mark was not so concerned
about a lost privilege
that he failed to appreciate
the opportunities that were in front of him.
Well, while he’s sailing away and working,
what’s Paul doing?
Verse 40 says: “Paul selected Silas.”
Verse 41 says:
“He went through Syria and Cilicia,
strengthening the congregations.”
Now, as you carry on in chapter 16,
we find him arriving
in Derbe and Lystra,
and verse 1 says
he met Timothy, a disciple.
In verse 3, what happens?
Paul expressed a desire
for Timothy to join him
—Mark’s replacement.
Interestingly, as Paul now begins
to travel with Timothy,
we find that the apostle Paul writes
to the Thessalonians within a year.
And at 1 Thessalonians 1:1,
Paul’s greeting is
from Paul, Silas, and Timothy.
Second Thessalonians too is
I wonder how Mark is feeling at this point.
Five years later,
he writes to the Corinthians.
And, again,
now it’s from Paul and Timothy.
During all this time,
where Timothy is rising, what’s Mark doing?
He’s rowing.
Mark is continually,
faithfully serving Jehovah.
Eleven years later,
in the years 60 C.E. to 61 C.E.,
when Paul was in Rome, who was with him?
John Mark.
And when Paul
wrote letters to various congregations,
he describes John Mark.
In fact, in one of the letters
in sending greetings (this is in Colossians),
he makes reference to the fact
that he had wanted to send John Mark
as a personal representative
to the congregations.
And that indicates to us
what kind of man Mark was
and what reputation he had.
A personal representative
was someone who was deeply trusted,
and he would have to represent Paul
before the congregations that he would visit.
That is the reputation of John Mark.
You know, there’s no record in the Scriptures
of the challenges
that John Mark faced in his ministry.
There are no shipwrecks, no beatings,
no hunger, no left-for-dead for John Mark.
But there is one challenge that he faced
that is shared with us.
And that is his difficulty, or the challenge,
with the apostle Paul—his brother.
And yet, clearly, there were no hard feelings
between these two men,
even though there was a difference.
In fact,
in Paul’s final words chronologically
in the book of 2 Timothy chapter 4
in reference to John Mark,
he tells Timothy: ‘Bring Mark.
He is helpful’
—the under-rower, John Mark.
Interestingly,
for all that we know about Timothy,
there are no words recorded
of Timothy’s in the Scriptures.
And yet, John Mark wrote a Gospel.
And as a typical under-rower,
he never mentioned his name.
So when we put the pieces together
of what is shared
of John Mark in the Scriptures,
we get a portrait of a man
who was (1) zealous for promoting
the good news in the worldwide field
and (2) happy to serve others.
This alone is worthy of our imitation.
But there is more.
In your future, you may be the object
caught up in a Paul-and-Barnabas moment.
You may face changed circumstances
because of health or family issues.
You may be the one who has to work
in the shadow of a Timothy.
A door may close for you
or be closed for you.
But like Mark, do not be so concerned
about lost privileges
that you fail to appreciate the opportunities
that are right in front of you.
May you, like Mark,
keep your heart
and your hands strong.
Keep them on the oars.
Work in unison.
Cooperate with your brothers and sisters
for the Master.
May you, like Mark, be the under-rower.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Brother Lippold,
for that very practical counsel.
Well, now we’ll hear
from another one of the instructors
of the Gilead School,
Brother Richard Chilton.
And his theme for us today is
“Where You Go I Will Go.”
What do the following have in common?
Build an ark.
Choose 300 men.
March around the city seven times.
Follow this route to the Red Sea.
Did you figure it out?
Jehovah was providing
his people with direction.
And in the case of these examples,
sometimes that direction could appear to be,
let’s say, a bit unusual.
It’s not too hard for us
to imagine Noah responding,
“And you want me to build a massive ark?”
Or Gideon asking,
“Just 300 men
“against an army of 135,000
—are you sure?”
Or Joshua replying:
“March around Jericho seven times
“and just blow our horns?
That’s it?”
Or Moses saying,
“Why are we headed to the Red Sea
“when I believe
there is a much more direct route
to the Promised Land?”
They all could have responded in such ways,
but did they?
Let’s allow the Bible
to help us find the answer
in Genesis chapter 6.
At Genesis 6:22,
we find that “Noah did according
“to all that God had commanded him.
He did just so.”
In fact, in the examples we’ve mentioned,
they all “did just so.”
The direction might not have been
what they expected,
but they humbly made the mental turn,
so to speak,
and they followed the divine guidance
wherever it was taking them.
And because they did,
they saved not only themselves
but all those that were with them.
Clearly, the one leading them was Jehovah.
And by their responsive actions,
they were, in effect, saying to him:
“Where you go I will go.”
Well, what about you dear graduates
here before us today?
Like those faithful ones of old,
you are not alone in navigating your way.
Jehovah is where he has always been
—at the helm, guiding his people.
The only difference is that today
Jehovah is providing direction
through his “faithful and discreet slave,”
and it is
because of our limited understanding
that at times the direction may appear to be
a bit unusual.
Nonetheless,
you have followed that direction,
no matter what it was,
no matter where it was taking you.
And for that we want to say, “Thank you.”
In fact, we want to thank
all of you in our listening audience
for being responsive
toward the direction provided.
But we thank, especially,
you dear Gilead graduates before us today.
Now, why?
Because during the five months
that we have spent with you,
we saw you.
We saw how you closely followed
the direction of the faithful slave.
You “did just so.”
For example,
when presenting your student assignments,
you did so in English,
even though, for most of you,
that was not your mother tongue.
And when COVID protocols were set in place,
we saw you follow all of them,
even though they might
have been inconvenient,
in order to keep you
and your classmates healthy.
And when you were given counsel,
not only from your instructors
but from each other,
you expressed gratitude for it
and immediately went to work at applying it.
We saw you grow in your love for one another,
for God’s organization,
for Jehovah, and for his Son, Jesus.
All of this was a direct result
of your sensitivity
to the direction of the faithful slave.
But what about after you leave this place?
Even if you are assigned back
to your country of origin,
you won’t be the same person that left
and things may not be the way
you remember them either.
However, we have full confidence
that whatever future changes come your way,
you will continue echoing the sentiments
of the Moabitess Ruth.
Recall when she was faced with numerous,
intimidating changes
what she said to Naomi.
Her words are recorded for us
in Ruth chapter 1, the book bearing her name,
verses 16 and 17:
“Ruth said:
“‘Do not plead with me to abandon you,
“‘to turn back from accompanying you;
“‘for where you go
“‘I will go,
“‘and where you spend the night,
I will spend the night.
“‘Your people will be my people,
and your God my God.
“‘Where you die I will die,
“‘and there I will be buried.
“‘May Jehovah do so to me
and add to it if anything but death
should separate me from you.’”
Now, what did all of this
actually mean for Ruth?
It meant leaving what was familiar to her.
It meant adopting a people
with beliefs different from hers.
It meant following customs
that could result in her becoming
the wife of someone
she did not choose or did not even know,
for that matter.
It meant never returning
to what she had left behind.
When Ruth said to Naomi:
“Where you go I will go,”
she meant with no clauses,
no exceptions, no bargaining.
It was without question.
For Ruth, these were not just words;
it was her mindset.
It was the same mindset that Noah,
Gideon, Joshua, and Moses had.
And like them, if we endeavor
to always see the one behind the direction,
we will be able to move
in heart harmony with the chariot
—not under it,
not behind it, right alongside it.
In fact, this thought brings back to my mind
a fond memory.
I recall that when my wife and I
lived in South Africa,
I once observed a flock of birds in motion.
What species?
I do not know.
But I’m sure
they numbered into the thousands.
And as they swirled and turned
as a group in unison,
it was a beautiful,
magnificent sight to behold.
What’s interesting is that scientists think
that each bird focuses,
not on the entire flock,
but on just a few
of its most nearest neighbors in flight.
When those near them turn,
they turn.
Each one does this,
creating a sort of harmonious wave effect.
Well, in a similar way,
when we display
by our speech and actions the mindset:
‘Jehovah,
where you and your slave go I will go,’
we motivate others near us to do the same.
When a change in theocratic direction comes
and we make the turn,
then our spiritual brothers and sisters
make the turn with us.
And when Jehovah’s people turn in sync,
in mid-flight, so to speak,
it is a beautiful thing
in the eyes of Jehovah.
Just as Noah, Gideon,
Joshua, Moses, and Ruth
set the pattern for all of us,
now dear graduates,
it is your turn
to set the pattern for others.
As you continue to follow closely
the direction provided by Jehovah
through his faithful slave,
others will see his blessing upon you.
They will see how
he is keeping you safe and secure.
They will see your joy and contentment.
And out of a keen desire
to have that same experience,
they too will be motivated to say:
“Where you go I will go.”
Thank you so much, Brother Chilton.
It’s very, very practical advice
for the students and for all of us.
We appreciate it so much.
Well, we’ll hear now
from the third and final instructor
from the Gilead School,
Brother James Cauthon.
And his theme for us today is
“Counselor or Shepherd?”
Which has greater appeal
—an effective counselor or a loving shepherd?
If you’re to be effective,
brothers and sisters,
in strengthening the organization
and building up the brotherhood,
it’s a good subject to consider.
And it includes you sisters too.
A counselor can be defined
as one who gives advice.
Now, the world has a lot of counselors.
They’ve got marriage counselors
and financial counselors
and bereavement counselors
and all kinds of counselors.
And you’ll find that their counsel varies
according to their experience and education.
Ahithophel
is a Biblical example of a counselor,
and the Bible says what he advised
was “considered as the word of the true God.”
Today, a person might feel
that he’s a good counselor,
and he may freely offer advice,
some of which
may or may not be accepted.
Maybe a solution-oriented husband
counsels his emotionally distraught wife
to just quit worrying.
Or a well-versed elder
quickly reads a Bible text,
and he advises
an extremely anxiety-filled publisher
to just get over it.
How effective is such counsel?
There’s a saying,
People don’t care how much you know
until they know how much you care.
Counsel is more effective
when the counselor is also a shepherd.
A shepherd is one
who comforts, nourishes, listens,
and does not ignore
the emotional needs of the distraught one.
Jehovah gives counsel, or advice,
but he always does more.
You see, he also shepherds.
When he counsels,
he tends to the person’s emotional needs
and he provides the needed follow-up.
Consider how he dealt
with an emotionally depressed prophet
by the name of Elijah.
I’m turning to 1 Kings 19,
and we’re going to consider just briefly
the interaction he had with Elijah.
And you will recall
that he was driven by fear.
Elijah was driven by fear of Jezebel.
Elijah fled southward
for 95 miles (150 km) to Beer-sheba,
and then he walked for about another
200 miles (320 km) to Mount Horeb.
But now notice in verse 5, it says:
“Then he [that is, Elijah]
“lay down and fell asleep
under the broom tree.
“But suddenly an angel
touched him and said to him:
“‘Get up and eat.’
“When he looked, there at his head
was a round loaf on heated stones
“and a jug of water.
“He ate and drank and lay down again.
“Later the angel of Jehovah
came back a second time
“and touched him and said:
“‘Get up and eat,
for the journey will be too much for you.’
“So he got up and ate and drank,
“and in the strength of that nourishment
“he went on for 40 days and 40 nights
until he reached Horeb,
the mountain of the true God.”
You notice,
the angel awakened Elijah;
ministered to him;
and Elijah went back to sleep,
like depressed ones often do.
Maybe the angel waited all night
and then he touched Elijah again
and then gave him more nourishment
—nourishment that would take him
40 days and 40 nights
on his journey to Mount Horeb.
Now, here’s a question
you have to ask yourself:
Do you think that that angel agreed
with the way Elijah was acting?
Do you think the angel
might have wanted to give a little counsel
and tell Elijah:
“Look, Elijah, just get over it.
Just trust God
and get back to your assignment”?
But he didn’t.
Do you think Jehovah
knew how Elijah was thinking?
Do you think he agreed with it?
No, definitely not.
See, a counselor may have handled it one way,
but Jehovah
—“the God of all comfort”—
would first address Elijah’s emotional needs.
So when Elijah finally entered
the cave at Mount Horeb,
do you remember what Jehovah did?
In a calm, low, gentle voice,
he said: ‘Eijah, what is your business here?’
And that was a warm invitation
for Elijah to express himself.
‘Just talk to me,’ you see.
And so Elijah did.
Look in verse 10,
and see what it was that Elijah said.
He said: “I have been absolutely zealous
for Jehovah the God of armies;
for the people of Israel
have forsaken your covenant.”
So Elijah felt like his work was in vain.
And then he said: “I’m the only one left.”
Elijah felt alone.
And he said: “They are seeking
to take [me away, take] my life away.”
So Elijah was also afraid.
Well, Jehovah heard what he said,
and he addressed all of Elijah’s concerns.
And then afterward,
he gave Elijah the encouragement
that would allow him
to continue on in Jehovah’s service
with boldness.
So, what can we learn
from this brief experience?
Well, we learned that Jehovah
validated the man’s emotions
without agreeing with his thinking.
And we also learned
that it’s often not necessary
to offer a quick solution.
Simply allowing a person
to express themselves
without feeling judged
can bring tremendous relief.
In fact, friends,
being heard is so close to being loved
that for the average person,
it’s indistinguishable.
Like Jehovah, we’ll be more effective
if we’re patient shepherds that listen
and give thoughtful consideration
to the feelings of those
that we’re seeking to help.
So here are four takeaway points, OK?
Number one:
Be a listener, not a lecturer.
Show empathy.
And remember,
empathy is seeing with the eyes of another,
hearing with the ears of another,
and feeling with the heart of another.
It’s easy, friends, for imperfect humans
to take themselves too seriously,
especially when they’re given
a position of responsibility.
So at times
it may even be best to refrain
from offering counsel too soon
because that creates an air of superiority.
Conversely, a willingness to hear
even “wild talk” from another
will reveal the depth of our own humility.
Point number two:
Validate people’s emotions,
and don’t just dismiss them.
Feelings are real,
so know the difference between
validating and invalidating statements.
“I can see why you would feel that way.
That must be really hard.”
You see, when we listen with empathy,
what we’re really saying is:
“You matter to me.
You’re important, and I care how you feel.”
Additionally,
when you validate the other person,
they become significantly more likely
to listen to advice or counsel later.
Remember, there is a difference between—
And by the way, let me just say this:
Counsel is not necessarily good
just because it’s accurate.
Frankly, how you give it
and when you give it is important.
So try to remember that.
Just because it’s accurate,
doesn’t make it good.
And there’s a difference too between
validating and devastating.
“You know, you’re too sensitive.”
“What’s the big deal?”
“I don’t want to hear it.”
“I don’t have time for this.”
“You need to work on your spirituality.”
Now, although we may not mean it,
this can translate into:
“You’re not important.
“Your feelings aren’t important.
And frankly, I don’t really care.”
Point number three:
Acknowledge a vulnerability.
Sharing personal thoughts
and emotions can be difficult,
uncomfortable, and even scary.
But I think that we’re encouraged
to develop fellow feeling.
And finally, point number four:
Offering counsel is entirely optional.
How many of us, brothers,
have been on a shepherding call,
and we’ve said virtually nothing?
And the publisher, the brother or sister,
afterward says:
“You know what?
That was the best
shepherding call I ever had.”
So, what some may need
is not some solution for the problem
but simply to talk to a good listener
—someone who will not tell them
how they’re supposed to feel,
but will listen without being judgmental.
The saying is, friends, Time is life.
If we won’t give a brother our time,
do you really think
we would give our life for him?
So when we ‘show favor to the lowly one’
by giving him time and attention,
we are, in fact, “lending to Jehovah.”
And the Bible says
that “he will repay” us in our time of need.
So weave counsel and shepherding together,
and you’ll be treasured by all those
around you and, most of all,
by Jehovah God and Jesus Christ.
Thank you so much, Brother Cauthon,
for that very wise and practical counsel.
I’m sure elders all around the world
will benefit so much from hearing that talk
when it goes up on JW Broadcasting.
We hope you enjoyed Part 1 of the graduation.
Parts 2 and 3 will be available
on jw.org later this month.
Before we conclude,
let’s visit the island of Greenland.
It’s the world’s largest island.
What picture comes to your mind?
White sandy beaches?
Warm sunny weather?
No.
Greenland is among the closest countries
to the North Pole
and is almost entirely covered by ice.
The northern lights dance on the night sky,
arctic foxes and polar bears roam the tundra,
and icebergs dot
the turquoise waters of the fjords.
Greenland is the birthplace of the kayak,
as Eskimo hunters
needed a narrow vessel
to navigate these icy waterways.
Most locals travel by boat,
since roadways are limited.
Our brothers and sisters
use their boats to reach
remote communities
scattered around the island.
The preachers of God’s Word in Greenland
have a rich history
of using inventive transportation.
The first publishers on the island,
Kristen Lauritsen and Arne Hjelm,
even used dogsleds to complete
their 1,600-kilometer,
or 1,000-mile, preaching tour.
Today, publishers here are still resourceful.
They find interested ones in businesses,
at fishing docks,
and through telephone witnessing.
The Greenlandic language
can be complex with its long,
multisyllabic words,
yet great care is taken
to translate publications and videos
for the 57,000 who speak the language.
On October 30, 2021,
the New World Translation
of the Christian Greek Scriptures
was released in Greenlandic, a delight
for those on the island who love God’s Word.
All 120 publishers of Greenland
send their warm love and greetings
to the worldwide brotherhood.
From the World Headquarters
of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting!